Practical/mptcp-v1.md, before:

- [About](#about)
- [usage](#usage)
- [Configuration](#Configuration)
- [Configuration with iptools2](#iptools2)
- [Netlink PM (mptcpd)](#netlink)
- [MPTCP proxy setup](#proxy_setup)

# MPTCP v1

## About <a name="about"></a>

RFC 8684 : https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8684.html#name-requesting-a-change-in-a-pa 

[RetHat MPTCPv1 example of configuration and usage](https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/9/html/configuring_and_managing_networking/getting-started-with-multipath-tcp_configuring-and-managing-networking)  

available in mainline kernel : https://github.com/multipath-tcp/mptcp_net-next/wiki 

### instalation 
is similar to mptcp v0: **building and install from source** 
or 
install compiled .deb packeges from https://kernel.ubuntu.com/~kernel-ppa/mainline/ e.g. take the v6.0 version.. install headers and image .. (not tested)

### MPTCP.v0 vs MPTCP.v1  

Explenation on diff v1 vs v0 : https://github.com/multipath-tcp/mptcp_net-next/issues/300

My question on mptcpv1 repo github : explanation about upstream and out-of-tree implementation of mptcp 
https://github.com/multipath-tcp/mptcp_net-next/issues/251 

In short:
MPTCPv1 is the protocol defined in RFC8684, MPTCPv0: RFC6824 (deprecated by MPTCPv1)

There are two major implementations of MPTCP in the Linux kernel:
an out-of-tree implementation (fork), aka mptcp.org: https://github.com/multipath-tcp/mptcp and an upstream version (this repo).

The out-of-tree supports MPTCPv0 from the beginning and MPTCPv1 since v0.96 (kernel 5.4). https://github.com/multipath-tcp/mptcp/tree/mptcp_v0.96 
The upstream version only supports MPTCPv1.

The upstream implementations has for the moment only one packets scheduler inspired from BLEST model.
No coupled congestion controls are supported (yet), regular ones per subflow are used..
 

- ``MPTCP.v1``: 
    - isolated sysctl calls in namespaces 
    - included in upstream kernel
    - less modification to TCP stack 
    - easy maintenance 
    - intel gays  


## Usage <a name="usage"></a>

use_mptcp :   https://github.com/pabeni/mptcp-tools 

An utility to force a non MPTCP-enabled application to use MPTCP instead of TCP.
Usage: ./use_mptcp.sh <app> <app command line>
It will build on the fly wrapper library to hijack the socket() libcall, requires gcc and make

`sh /home/vad/mptcp-tools/use_mptcp/use_mptcp.sh  iperf3 -s &`
q
  
## Configuration <a name="Configuration"></a>

  **/proc/sys/net/mptcp/*** Variables   → configuration variables 
- [sysctl variables](https://github.com/multipath-tcp/mptcp_net-next/blob/export/Documentation/networking/mptcp-sysctl.rst)
- [Kernel v5.15](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/v5.15-rc6/networking/mptcp-sysctl.html) 
- [Kervel v5.19](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/v5.19/networking/mptcp-sysctl.html?highlight=mptcp)

- **enabled** - BOOLEAN Control whether MPTCP sockets can be created. MPTCP sockets can be created if the value is 1. This is a per-namespace sysctl. Default: 1 (enabled) 

- **pm_type** - INTEGER

Set the default path manager type to use for each new MPTCP socket. In-kernel path management will control subflow connections and address advertisements according to per-namespace values configured over the MPTCP netlink API. Userspace path management puts per-MPTCP-connection subflow connection decisions and address advertisements under control of a privileged userspace program, at the cost of more netlink traffic to propagate all of the related events and commands.

This is a per-namespace sysctl.

0 - In-kernel path manager

1 - Userspace path manager
 
- **add_addr_timeout** - INTEGER (seconds) Set the timeout after which an ADD_ADDR control message will be resent to an MPTCP peer that has not acknowledged a previous ADD_ADDR message. The default value matches TCP_RTO_MAX. This is a per-namespace sysctl. Default: 120 

- **checksum_enabled** - BOOLEAN Control whether DSS checksum can be enabled. DSS checksum can be enabled if the value is nonzero. This is a per-namespace sysctl. Default: 0 

- **allow_join_initial_addr_port** - BOOLEAN Allow peers to send join requests to the IP address and port number used by the initial subflow if the value is 1. This controls a flag that is sent to the peer at connection time, and whether such join requests are accepted or denied. Joins to addresses advertised with ADD_ADDR are not affected by this value. This is a per-namespace sysctl. Default: 1

- **stale_loss_cnt** - INTEGER The number of MPTCP-level retransmission intervals with no traffic and pending outstanding data on a given subflow required to declare it stale. The packet scheduler ignores stale subflows. A low stale_loss_cnt value allows for fast active-backup switch-over, an high value maximize links utilization on edge scenarios e.g. lossy link with high BER or peer pausing the data processing. This is a per-namespace sysctl. Default: 4


### Configuration with iptools2 <a name="iptools2"></a>

  iproute2 new version (supports mptcp)-> https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/network/iproute2/iproute2.git/ 
  
  `man ip mptcp` : ip mptcp (man page)-> https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man8/ip-mptcp.8.html  

(iproute2 how to use) https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/8/html/configuring_and_managing_networking/getting-started-with-multipath-tcp_configuring-and-managing-networking 
 
### Configuration with Network Manager 
 
 https://networkmanager.dev/blog/networkmanager-1-40/ 
 https://networkmanager.dev/docs/api/latest/NetworkManager.conf.html
 
 MPTCP support NetworkManager can now do endpoint management for MPTCP. Endpoints are IP addresses that can be announced or used for additional subflows. Those can be configured manually with iproute2’s ip mptcp endpoint command or automatically by the mptcpd daemon. NetworkManager now also automatically configures endpoints, similar to mptcpd’s address notification feature. This is configurable via the “connection.mptcp-flags” property. The default setting is such that MPTCP handling is automatically enabled if the kernel sysctl “/proc/sys/net/mptcp/enabled” indicates so.

But NM at least has all the information (on which is which, and on how long the address will still be valid), if any is needed. [1]: Depending what the userspace MPTCP manager can do exactly (don't know), it might be possible to even set them per connection -- so if you have a connection established at point T1 from the ethernet address E(T1) would also get the WiFi address W(T1) but none of the T2, but that's probably far out of scope right now.
  
## Netlink PM (mptcpd) <a name="netlink"></a>

git -> https://github.com/intel/mptcpd
  
`./mptcpd  --debug --path-manager=sspi  --addr-flags=subflow  
`
- "addr-flags" are used when announcing an IP address (See the ip-mptcp(8))

- "notify-flags" provides for further control over how plugins are
  notified of changes to local IP addresses.  See the mptcpd(8) man
  page shipped with this mptcpd release for further details.

running  mptcpd with --addr-flags=subflow, will change limits of mptcp protocol : limits are changed to add_addr_accepted 2 subflows 2

**install from .tar.gz (release 0.8) :** 
```
mkdir the_build
cd the_build
../configure
make
```
  
**uninstall:** in folder og mptcpd : 
```  
make uninstall  	
make distclean
```
https://gist.github.com/ruario/a36052a1ae1de4edbc6ad39fe39e5385 

/usr/bin/mkdir -p '/usr/local/etc/mptcpd'
/usr/bin/install -c -m 644 mptcpd.conf '/usr/local/etc/mptcpd'
default config file 

### Control 

`sudo systemctl daemon-reload`
`sudo systemctl start mptcp.service`

  **systemctl list-units -a**  → see running services 
 
  **journalctl | tail** → error apears on journal iof service not started 

 Libraries have been installed in: **/usr/local/lib/mptcpd**


while trying to **run bitwarden_rs in a LXC container** and solved it by removing the LIMITNPROC line in the systemd file
#LimitNPROC=1

**libtool: finish:** PATH="/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin:/snap/bin:/sbin" ldconfig -n /usr/local/lib

If you ever happen to want to link against installed libraries
in a given directory, LIBDIR, you must either use libtool, and
specify the full pathname of the library, or use the '-LLIBDIR'
flag during linking and do at least one of the following:
   - add LIBDIR to the 'LD_LIBRARY_PATH' environment variable
     during execution
   - add LIBDIR to the 'LD_RUN_PATH' environment variable
     during linking
   - use the '-Wl,-rpath -Wl,LIBDIR' linker flag
   - have your system administrator add LIBDIR to '/etc/ld.so.conf'

See any operating system documentation about shared libraries for
more information, such as the ld(1) and ld.so(8) manual pages.

## BPF: packet scheduler
 
 https://github.com/multipath-tcp/mptcp_net-next/issues/75
 
 
## MPTCP proxy setup <a name="proxy_setup"></a>
 
 using raspberry as proxy and ubuntu 22.04, 
 * [example, tutorial configuration, june 2022](https://www.tessares.net/mptcp-proxy-setup-at-home-easier-now/)

Commit message:

Add required frags that need to be added to Makefile of mptcpd

Practical/mptcp-v1.md, after:

- [About](#about)
- [usage](#usage)
- [Configuration](#Configuration)
- [Configuration with iptools2](#iptools2)
- [Netlink PM (mptcpd)](#netlink)
- [MPTCP proxy setup](#proxy_setup)

# MPTCP v1

## About <a name="about"></a>

RFC 8684 : https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8684.html#name-requesting-a-change-in-a-pa 

[RetHat MPTCPv1 example of configuration and usage](https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/9/html/configuring_and_managing_networking/getting-started-with-multipath-tcp_configuring-and-managing-networking)  

available in mainline kernel : https://github.com/multipath-tcp/mptcp_net-next/wiki 

### instalation 
is similar to mptcp v0: **building and install from source** 
or 
install compiled .deb packeges from https://kernel.ubuntu.com/~kernel-ppa/mainline/ e.g. take the v6.0 version.. install headers and image .. (not tested)

### MPTCP.v0 vs MPTCP.v1  

Explenation on diff v1 vs v0 : https://github.com/multipath-tcp/mptcp_net-next/issues/300

My question on mptcpv1 repo github : explanation about upstream and out-of-tree implementation of mptcp 
https://github.com/multipath-tcp/mptcp_net-next/issues/251 

In short:
MPTCPv1 is the protocol defined in RFC8684, MPTCPv0: RFC6824 (deprecated by MPTCPv1)

There are two major implementations of MPTCP in the Linux kernel:
an out-of-tree implementation (fork), aka mptcp.org: https://github.com/multipath-tcp/mptcp and an upstream version (this repo).

The out-of-tree supports MPTCPv0 from the beginning and MPTCPv1 since v0.96 (kernel 5.4). https://github.com/multipath-tcp/mptcp/tree/mptcp_v0.96 
The upstream version only supports MPTCPv1.

The upstream implementations has for the moment only one packets scheduler inspired from BLEST model.
No coupled congestion controls are supported (yet), regular ones per subflow are used..
 

- ``MPTCP.v1``: 
    - isolated sysctl calls in namespaces 
    - included in upstream kernel
    - less modification to TCP stack 
    - easy maintenance 
    - intel gays  


## Usage <a name="usage"></a>

use_mptcp :   https://github.com/pabeni/mptcp-tools 

An utility to force a non MPTCP-enabled application to use MPTCP instead of TCP.
Usage: ./use_mptcp.sh <app> <app command line>
It will build on the fly wrapper library to hijack the socket() libcall, requires gcc and make

`sh /home/vad/mptcp-tools/use_mptcp/use_mptcp.sh  iperf3 -s &`
q
  
## Configuration <a name="Configuration"></a>

  **/proc/sys/net/mptcp/*** Variables   → configuration variables 
- [sysctl variables](https://github.com/multipath-tcp/mptcp_net-next/blob/export/Documentation/networking/mptcp-sysctl.rst)
- [Kernel v5.15](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/v5.15-rc6/networking/mptcp-sysctl.html) 
- [Kervel v5.19](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/v5.19/networking/mptcp-sysctl.html?highlight=mptcp)

- **enabled** - BOOLEAN Control whether MPTCP sockets can be created. MPTCP sockets can be created if the value is 1. This is a per-namespace sysctl. Default: 1 (enabled) 

- **pm_type** - INTEGER

Set the default path manager type to use for each new MPTCP socket. In-kernel path management will control subflow connections and address advertisements according to per-namespace values configured over the MPTCP netlink API. Userspace path management puts per-MPTCP-connection subflow connection decisions and address advertisements under control of a privileged userspace program, at the cost of more netlink traffic to propagate all of the related events and commands.

This is a per-namespace sysctl.

0 - In-kernel path manager

1 - Userspace path manager
 
- **add_addr_timeout** - INTEGER (seconds) Set the timeout after which an ADD_ADDR control message will be resent to an MPTCP peer that has not acknowledged a previous ADD_ADDR message. The default value matches TCP_RTO_MAX. This is a per-namespace sysctl. Default: 120 

- **checksum_enabled** - BOOLEAN Control whether DSS checksum can be enabled. DSS checksum can be enabled if the value is nonzero. This is a per-namespace sysctl. Default: 0 

- **allow_join_initial_addr_port** - BOOLEAN Allow peers to send join requests to the IP address and port number used by the initial subflow if the value is 1. This controls a flag that is sent to the peer at connection time, and whether such join requests are accepted or denied. Joins to addresses advertised with ADD_ADDR are not affected by this value. This is a per-namespace sysctl. Default: 1

- **stale_loss_cnt** - INTEGER The number of MPTCP-level retransmission intervals with no traffic and pending outstanding data on a given subflow required to declare it stale. The packet scheduler ignores stale subflows. A low stale_loss_cnt value allows for fast active-backup switch-over, an high value maximize links utilization on edge scenarios e.g. lossy link with high BER or peer pausing the data processing. This is a per-namespace sysctl. Default: 4


### Configuration with iptools2 <a name="iptools2"></a>

  iproute2 new version (supports mptcp)-> https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/network/iproute2/iproute2.git/ 
  
  `man ip mptcp` : ip mptcp (man page)-> https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man8/ip-mptcp.8.html  

(iproute2 how to use) https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/8/html/configuring_and_managing_networking/getting-started-with-multipath-tcp_configuring-and-managing-networking 
 
### Configuration with Network Manager 
 
 https://networkmanager.dev/blog/networkmanager-1-40/ 
 https://networkmanager.dev/docs/api/latest/NetworkManager.conf.html
 
 MPTCP support NetworkManager can now do endpoint management for MPTCP. Endpoints are IP addresses that can be announced or used for additional subflows. Those can be configured manually with iproute2’s ip mptcp endpoint command or automatically by the mptcpd daemon. NetworkManager now also automatically configures endpoints, similar to mptcpd’s address notification feature. This is configurable via the “connection.mptcp-flags” property. The default setting is such that MPTCP handling is automatically enabled if the kernel sysctl “/proc/sys/net/mptcp/enabled” indicates so.

But NM at least has all the information (on which is which, and on how long the address will still be valid), if any is needed. [1]: Depending what the userspace MPTCP manager can do exactly (don't know), it might be possible to even set them per connection -- so if you have a connection established at point T1 from the ethernet address E(T1) would also get the WiFi address W(T1) but none of the T2, but that's probably far out of scope right now.
  
## Netlink PM (mptcpd) <a name="netlink"></a>

git -> https://github.com/intel/mptcpd
  
`./mptcpd  --debug --path-manager=sspi  --addr-flags=subflow  
`
- "addr-flags" are used when announcing an IP address (See the ip-mptcp(8))

- "notify-flags" provides for further control over how plugins are
  notified of changes to local IP addresses.  See the mptcpd(8) man
  page shipped with this mptcpd release for further details.

running  mptcpd with --addr-flags=subflow, will change limits of mptcp protocol : limits are changed to add_addr_accepted 2 subflows 2

**install from .tar.gz (release 0.8) :** 
```
mkdir the_build
cd the_build
../configure
make
```

**ADD to Makefile in plugins dir**  
_-pthread_ -> required to start listening thread in sspi plugin
 
 `CFLAGS =  -g -O0 -Og -fvisibility=hidden -Wall -pthread -Wextra -Werror -pedantic -fstack-protector-strong -Wformat=2`
 
add _library math_ for pow calculation 
 
 `CODE_COVERAGE_LIBS = "-lm"`
 
**uninstall:** in folder og mptcpd : 
```  
make uninstall  	
make distclean
```
https://gist.github.com/ruario/a36052a1ae1de4edbc6ad39fe39e5385 

/usr/bin/mkdir -p '/usr/local/etc/mptcpd'
/usr/bin/install -c -m 644 mptcpd.conf '/usr/local/etc/mptcpd'
default config file 

### Control 

`sudo systemctl daemon-reload`
`sudo systemctl start mptcp.service`

  **systemctl list-units -a**  → see running services 
 
  **journalctl | tail** → error apears on journal iof service not started 

 Libraries have been installed in: **/usr/local/lib/mptcpd**


while trying to **run bitwarden_rs in a LXC container** and solved it by removing the LIMITNPROC line in the systemd file
#LimitNPROC=1

**libtool: finish:** PATH="/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin:/snap/bin:/sbin" ldconfig -n /usr/local/lib

If you ever happen to want to link against installed libraries
in a given directory, LIBDIR, you must either use libtool, and
specify the full pathname of the library, or use the '-LLIBDIR'
flag during linking and do at least one of the following:
   - add LIBDIR to the 'LD_LIBRARY_PATH' environment variable
     during execution
   - add LIBDIR to the 'LD_RUN_PATH' environment variable
     during linking
   - use the '-Wl,-rpath -Wl,LIBDIR' linker flag
   - have your system administrator add LIBDIR to '/etc/ld.so.conf'

See any operating system documentation about shared libraries for
more information, such as the ld(1) and ld.so(8) manual pages.

## BPF: packet scheduler
 
 https://github.com/multipath-tcp/mptcp_net-next/issues/75
 
 
## MPTCP proxy setup <a name="proxy_setup"></a>
 
 using raspberry as proxy and ubuntu 22.04, 
 * [example, tutorial configuration, june 2022](https://www.tessares.net/mptcp-proxy-setup-at-home-easier-now/)
